**Web 1.0, Web 2.0 and Web 3.0** are all different stages of the Internet. These are buzzwords, thus lack clear definitions. However, Web 1.0 can be associated with the era of static websites. Web 2.0 can be associated with the era of interactive web sites. Web 3.0 focuses on web services and semantic markup.

### Web 1.0 - “read-only web”

Web 1.0 Can be associated with the era of static websites. During this phase static websites were created and used in order to display information for users. These websites had no or little interaction capabilities. It was used for representation of static content and thus added a lot of professionalism in the work of writers, authors, etc. A publisher could use the web for displaying the information, and the user can easily get access to this information by visiting the publisher’s website. Thus, this stage is also known as the early stage of the evolution of the web, also known as the “read-only web”. During this period, only text mails could be written and sent. One could not upload or attach any images or pictures.

By the mid-1990s, the introduction of web browsers such as Netscape Navigator ushered in the era of Web 1.0. This was the age of static web pages retrieved from servers, a far cry from the slick content that is taken for granted today. Most internet users at that time were delighted by the novelty of features such as email and real-time news retrieval. Content creation was still in its infancy, and users had little opportunity for interactive applications
Examples of Web 1.0: Blogs, where users could only read but not interact with them

### Web 2.0 - “read-write” Web

During this stage, websites grew in terms of interaction capabilities. One can also relate this phase with websites like YouTube. This phase is particularly related with the social networking concepts. Web 2.0 is described as the “read-write” web. The terms like social-media and video streaming gained momentum during Web 2.0. This period is also credited for easy exchange of music and video clips. Search engine browsers also entered into an advanced form and became capable of managing a large number of users at the same time. In this stage, users are able to interact with content.

Web 2.0 makes it possible for user-generated content to be viewed by millions of people around the world virtually in an instant; this unparalleled reach has led to an explosion of user-generated content in recent years.

The exponential growth of Web 2.0 has been driven by key innovations such as mobile internet access and social networks, as well as the near-ubiquity of powerful mobile devices like iPhones and Android-powered devices. These developments enabled the dominance of apps that greatly expanded online interactivity and utility—for example, AirBnB, Facebook (now Meta), Instagram, TikTok, Twitter, Uber, WhatsApp, and YouTube, to name a few.
These applications have also spurred the growth of the gig economy, by enabling millions of people to earn income on a part-time or full-time basis by driving, renting their homes, delivering food and groceries, or selling goods and services online. Web 2.0 has also been tremendously disruptive to certain industries, to the point of being an existential threat to some of them. These are sectors that have either failed to adapt to the new web-centric business model or been slow to do so, with retail, entertainment, media, and advertising being among the hardest hit.

Examples of Web 2.0: Social Media applications.

### Web 3.0: The next evolutionary step of the Web

While there is not a standardized definition of Web 3.0. it does have a few defining features:

**Decentralization:** This is a core tenet of Web 3.0. In Web 2.0, computers use HTTP in the form of unique web addresses to find information, which is stored at a fixed location, generally on a single server. With Web 3.0, because information would be found based on its content, it could be stored in multiple locations simultaneously and hence be decentralized. This would break down the massive databases currently held by internet giants like Facebook (now Meta) and Google, and would prevent their undue enrichment by handing greater control to users.

With Web 3.0, the data generated by disparate and increasingly powerful computing resources, including mobile phones, desktops, appliances, vehicles, and sensors, will be sold by users through decentralized data networks, ensuring that users retain ownership control.

**Trustless and permissionless:** In addition to decentralization and being based upon open source software, Web 3.0 will also be trustless (i.e., the network will allow participants to interact directly without going through a trusted intermediary) and permissionless (meaning that anyone can participate without authorization from a governing body). As a result, Web 3.0 applications will run on blockchains or decentralized peer-to-peer networks, or a combination thereof — such decentralized apps are referred to as dApps. Furthermore, we can expect to see the implementation of blockchain interoperability in Web 3.0., whereby different blockchains will be able to interact with and transfer assets to each other, just like different operating systems such as Android and IoS interoperate with each other in Web 2.0 today.
